---
title: "Shelter Game Analysis"
date: 2015-10-09 16:00:00
tags:
- games
- game_design
- game_analysis
---

In Shelter, you are a mother badger trying to raise and protect your young pups from the dangers of mother nature. Its beautiful, stylized artwork and a unique soundtrack help bring the story to life.

<!--more-->

{% include figure.html description="Shelter title art" figure_url="/img/shelter_game.jpg" source="http://cdn.akamai.steamstatic.com/steam/apps/244710/header.jpg?t=1418389578" %}


## Mechanics

#### Player Interaction
- WASD keys to move - hold left shift to sprint
- mouse to look around, change direction
- left mouse - interact with environment
  - scavenge food, attack prey, bark (pups bark back in response)

#### Objectives
- keep pups alive
  - scavenge food
  - hide from predators
  - avoid environmental dangers

#### Boundaries
- cliff edges and walls
- fallen trees
- dynamic boundaries
  - fire
  - light boundary in night level

#### Resources
- food - apples, carrots, frogs, mice, foxes
- shelter - caves, burrows, long grass
- light in night level


## Aesthetics

#### Visuals
- models made up of large, simple polygons
- textures are large squares that are places on models almost randomly
- different overall color scheme for each scene

#### Sound
- unique music for each scene
- music changes depending on environment/enemies
  - indicates whether the area is dangerous or not
- the mom's bark and the higher-pitched bark of the pups


## Narrative

#### Characters
- mother badger and her five pups
- foxes, frogs, mice
  - prey for the badger family
- eagle
  -  the main enemy/predator

#### Plot

**Spoiler Alert!**

You start in a den with five pups, which you can't leave until you figure out how to feed the pale pup that is lying on the ground. After you figure that out, you leave the den. You can now explore the environment and scavenge and hunt food to feed the pups. There's no real destination in mind, you're just going where environmental obstacles are leading you.

Along the way, you encounter several environmental dangers and the the main enemy/predator, the eagle. After navigating all the obstacles and what you think is the final eagle area, you enter a nice open field. Then out of nowhere, surprise! The eagle is back and now there's nowhere to hide (because you're in a big open field). By this point, the pups are about the same size as their mom, so the eagle "randomly" attacks the mom.

After the mom is killed by the eagle, the camera pans out to the pups walking through the woods. They look rather sad, but they seem to be doing alright.

At the credits, the game shows the eagle returning to its nest with the mom badger in its claws. The nest is filled with little baby eagles. The circle of life.

**End Spoilers**


## Technology
- Simple AI for various creatures
- Released on Steam for PC and Mac
- Not very graphics intensive, doesn't require a lot of processing power
- Limited amount of physics simulations


### Wrap up
Shelter, though very short and simple, is a very good and beautiful game. Its stylized artwork and unique soundtrack breathe new life into the age old narrative of the circle of life.


*Note: I originally wrote this for EECS 494, the game design course at the University of Michigan. This and hundreds of other reviews can be found at the course [wiki page][494-gamewiki].*


[494-gamewiki]: https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~gameprof/gamewiki/index.php/Main_Page
