---
title: "Year Walk Game Analysis"
date: 2015-10-07 16:00:00
tags:
- games
- game_design
- game_analysis
---

Year Walk combines simple mechanics, beautiful aesthetics, and a simple yet compelling storyline to create a single player, first person, 2D puzzle game. Year Walk crosses into the horror genre at times, with creepy spirits in the woods and sound effects that send chills down your spine.

<!--more-->

Originally developed for iOS, the game was so popular it was ported to Windows, OS X, and Wii U.

{% include figure.html description="Year Walk title art" figure_url="http://cdn.akamai.steamstatic.com/steam/apps/269050/header.jpg?t=1394184712" %}


## Mechanics
The mechanics are combined to create a compelling 2D puzzle game that hints at a story line.

- Walking left and right along 2D parallax scenes  
- Walking forward and backward between different scenes, or sections of the map  
- Simple inputs: point, click, drag  
- Map - to help the player navigate and find clues  
- Sound - helps guide the player and is a mechanic of one of the puzzles  
- Encyclopedia - provides information on the things encountered in the game  
- Hints - available for if/when the player get stuck on a puzzle  


## Aesthetics
The visuals and sound combine to elicit certain emotions from the player, to the point where I personally felt chills at multiple points in the game.

#### Visuals
- 2D parallax scrolling scenes of the woods in winter  
- The artwork is pretty simple but beautifully depicts a stylized wooded area  
- Does a good job of being creepy but not too creepy  

#### Sound
- Crunch of the snow as you walk around, helps remind you that you're the only person out here in the woods  
- Music and sound effects are used to affect how the scene feels  
  - Beautiful when everything appears peaceful
  - Discordant when the scene turns creepy
  - Suspenseful, powerful near the end

## Narrative
**Spoiler Alert!**

Year Walk follows a young man who is doing what's called a [Year Walk][year-walk-swedish-wikipedia]. Before the walk begins, you meet the man's lover, the young daughter of a miller, who has been proposed to by another man. Once the walk begins, you look around for a bit and eventually find a gate with a lock on it. So you need to figure out how to unlock the gate. You walk around for a bit, and eventually notice some music coming a certain part of the woods. You move toward it and find a spirit of the woods called the Huldra. It lures you into a marshy area, where you again need to find her by following her music. When you find her at the end of the marsh, she seems really peaceful, until she jumps at you and her face becomes demonic and covered with blood. After she jumps at you, you are back out side the tree, and a key is floating in front of you. Aha, the key to the gate! You found it! You try to click on it, but it melts and falls to the ground. Bummer.

So you explore some more, trying to figure out where that key went, and you eventually find a stream. Inside the stream is the Brook Horse. He offers to give you the key if you can bring him four Mylings. So you go looking for these things and bring them back to the Brook Horse. You spend forever looking for the fourth one, but you can't find it. About this time, you notice that the encyclopedia tab of the menu seems to have some blood on it, so you go see what that's all about. Aha! There was a Myling in the encyclopedia entry about Mylings (see what I mean about inscrutable?)! You decide, after skipping the encyclopedia earlier, that now would be a good time read the rest of the entries; the Myling entry had helpful information, so the other entries might, as well. You learn about the spirits of the woods you've encountered and will encounter later in the game. These spirits are all from Swedish folklore and all have different superstitions associated with them. So anyway, you finish reading the encyclopedia and bring the last Myling to the Brook Horse. After which the trade is satisfied and the key appears in front of you. Before you can grab it, however, a Night Raven (one of the spirits you just read about) grabs it and flies away.

So you have to get the key back from the Night Raven. You eventually find him, and he basically just gives you the key. Finding him was the puzzle this time, I guess. Anyway, you finally have the key, and no spirit took it from you (finally), so you go unlock that mysterious gate. You walk through and are presented with a puzzle. You eventually solve the puzzle by gathering clues from around woods. You can now pass through the puzzle to what lies beyond: a church.

When you arrive at the church, the first thing you notice is that instead of walking side to side, you can now walk around the church. After solving yet another puzzle, you eventually figure out how to open the church, and you go inside. Now a bunch of puzzles (one for each spirit you've encountered) appear on the screen, each appearing after you solve the previous one. Between each puzzle, however, some text is displayed:

"It's too late now"

"It can't be changed"

"The decision has already been made"

"You must stop coming here"

(then one word at a time)

"I" "don't" "love" "you" "anymore"

As the word 'anymore' fades out, a scenic view of the woods fades in. It is no longer winter. You start walking along again, and eventually find the miller's daughter lying on the ground. The camera stops moving, and blood starts to appear, forming a small pool on the ground.

The screen goes black. The credits roll. You think the game is over, but at the end of the credits some more text appears. It hints that things can be changed, and gives you a clue about how to open the journal in the menu (the journal requires a username and password to open). After the clue, the game prompts you to "Walk Again?" So you do.

You find the username and password, login to the journal, and start reading through the journal of a professor or grad student, named Theo Alm, doing research on year walks. He goes Sweden for research, finds in the local archives a story about a young man (Daniel Svensson) who went on a year walk then later killed a young miller's daughter (Stina Nilsson) out of jealousy. He then goes around the country side looking for (and finding) all the landmarks that were in the game you just played. Along the way, he finds a wooden box with strange markings on the box (the same box can be found in the game). He then goes back home to his university and tries to piece everything together. As he is doing so, he starts having weird dreams, often filled with strange spirits. He talks to his colleagues about his dreams and they all think he's off his rocker, which he probably is. Eventually, he decides that there is a link between him and Daniel. He decides that if this is true, he wants to figure out a way to save Stina. He figures that the box is how he'll get a message to Daniel. So he decides to put a few things in the box. To figure out what, you need to back into the game and open the box as Daniel. Once you open the box, you find: 1) the press clippings of Daniel's execution (which include a quote from Daniel: "I should have killed myself. Then none of this would have happened."), 2) a note telling Daniel that "You can save her" and "You know what you must do", and 3) a knife.

**End Spoilers**

## Technology
- Originally developed for iOS  
- Later ported to Windows, OS X, and Wii U  
- The original platform (iOS) explains why the controls are so simple  

## Wrap up
The puzzles could be a little annoying at times, but the beautiful aesthetics and compelling storyline more than make up for that. Overall, I thoroughly enjoyed Year Walk and completely understand why it was so well received.


*Note: I originally wrote this for EECS 494, the game design course at the University of Michigan. This and hundreds of other reviews can be found at the course [wiki page][494-gamewiki].*


[year-walk-title-image]: http://cdn.akamai.steamstatic.com/steam/apps/269050/header.jpg?t=1394184712
[year-walk-swedish-wikipedia]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%85rsg%C3%A5ng
[494-gamewiki]: https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~gameprof/gamewiki/index.php/Main_Page
