---
title: "The Fall Game Analysis"
date: 2015-10-10 12:00:00
tags:
- games
- game_design
- game_analysis
---

The Fall is a Kickstarter-funded, 2.5D platformer, puzzle game. The beautiful aesthetics and original narrative combine to make this a highly enjoyable game.

<!--more-->

{% include figure.html description="The Fall title art" figure_url="/img/the_fall_game.jpg" source="http://cdn.akamai.steamstatic.com/steam/apps/290770/header.jpg?t=1434471787" %}


## Mechanics
The Fall is a 2.5D platformer puzzle game. Most of the mechanics stem from this game format.

#### Player Interaction

- The player can move left and right along the screen. The player can also move between different levels of the game by climbing/descending stairs, ladders, and elevators.
- Use the character's flashlight to reveal items of interest in the game. The player can often interact with these items by picking them up, or using them to interact with other items. This is the main mechanic used to solve puzzles in the game: pick up item A, find item B it is supposed to go with, use item A to interact with item B.
- The character also has a gun, which the player can use to fight enemies.

#### Objectives

The main character's objective is to keep her human pilot alive. The player achieves this by solving puzzles in an attempt to reach the medical bay of the building she is in.


## Aesthetics

#### Visuals

One of the most impressive features of the game, the visuals create an atmosphere of dysfunction, neglect, and decay. The visuals make it abundantly clear that something has gone pretty terribly wrong here.

- The world is poorly lit, likely because the lights all burned out long ago.
- There are disassembled robot parts piled everywhere. Human and robotic remains hang from vertical operating tables.
- Large areas are overgrown by fungi.
- Specs of dark decay float in the background

Even the menu hints that something is wrong with the main character (Arid). The menu is styled to look like Arid's computer screen and the graphics and words near the edges of the screen appear glitched. Also, whenever Arid exploits loophole in her operating parameters, the game view glitches, indicating that something about what just happened wasn't quite right.

#### Sound

There are various environmental sounds that add to the realism of the game. There is also some background music that adds to the atmosphere of the game. The music actually sounds like it could almost be coming from the environment, and is usually so quiet that you almost don't notice it, but it's definitely there and perfectly complements the atmosphere created by the visuals.

Another key piece of audio is the voices of the main AIs in the game. Each is unique, each has a different amount of inflection and computerization:
- Arid's voice is on the less computerized end of the spectrum. Though still obviously unnatural, it is not unpleasant and rather calming. She is also able to add inflection to her voice, to put emphasis on what she is saying
- The System Admin has two voices. One is very robotic and is used mainly to say the pre-programmed phrases he's required to say by his operating parameters. The other voice sounds very human, which helps him express the personality and emotions he developed after becoming sentient.
- The Caretaker's voice, like Arid's, is pretty close to being human. It's actually kind of jarring, however, because the Caretaker's physical form is very robotic


## Narrative
**Spoiler Alert!**

#### Characters
- Arid is an Autonomous Robotic Interface Device (A.R.I.D. - nicknamed Arid by the System Admin) AI on board a Mark-7 combat suit. She has three operating parameters: do not misrepresent reality, be obedient, and protect active pilot. Arid seems to have developed the ability to find loopholes in her operating parameters in order to grant herself access to restricted features of the suit, features that normally require the permission of the human pilot.
- The System Administrator is the AI on the mainframe of the facility. He's been here for a long time, long enough to become sentient and develop a personality and a near perfect human voice. He's still bound by his operating parameters, though, which are generally related to the rules of the facility.
- The Caretaker is an AI inside a robot. His operating parameters relate to identifying and depurposing faulty AI. He and the System Admin seem to be the only two 'people' in the facility. Everyone else (humans and robots alike) have either left or been depurposed, likely by the Caretaker.

#### Plot
Arid crash lands at a robot warranty and recycling facility. Initially she is below the lowest depurposing level. Littering the ground are piles of broken robot parts. After exploring a little bit, she meets the Caretaker, who decided Arid is faulty and tries to depurpose her. Before he can, though, Arid escapes and eventually finds her way to the next level.

On the lowest depurposing level, Arid meets the System Admin. Arid requests access to the medical bay of the facility, the System Admin starts to give her access, then the Caretaker shows up and stop him, saying that he can't allow faulty machines out of the depurposing level. The System Admin suggest Arid be reconfigured as a domestic droid. The Caretaker finds this to be reasonable, and Arid goes upstairs to the evaluation chamber where she needs to complete eight tasks/puzzles in order to be reclassified as a domestic droid. Arid does a good job of completing the puzzles until she encounters one that requires her to violate her first operating parameter, "Must not misrepresent reality." She figures out that if she can find the facility's mainframe, she can modify the puzzle's parameters so that she can solve it without violating her own operating parameters. So Arid goes in search of the mainframe, keeping in touch with the System Admin along the way.

Arid eventually finds the mainframe and attempts to modify the parameters of the puzzle. The Caretaker interrupts her before she can complete the modification, however, and seriously damages her. Arid convinces the System Admin, against his better judgment, to repair her. While Arid is being repaired, she is immobilized in the repair chamber. At this time, the Caretaker shows up again and decides to reformat the mainframe because the System Admin is assisting a faulty AI and is therefore faulty as well.

As the Caretaker starts the reformat, the System Admin desperately cries and pleads with Arid for her to help him. Arid can't, however, because she is currently immobilized inside the reparation change. Arid's repair completes shortly after the reformat completes and the System Admin's continually glitched voice turns to silence. Free from the reparation chamber, Arid shoots the Caretaker. She's too late, however, the reformat is complete. When Arid tries to talk to the system admin now, the only response she gets are the system admin's pre-programmed phrases. At this point, she tries to get the system admin to remember her, and more importantly, himself. When she can't she uncharacteristically shows disappointment/sorry at the loss of her friend.

After failing to reconnect with the system admin, Arid runs after the Caretaker. They fight briefly, the Caretaker points out a flaw in Arid's logic that violates her first operation parameter, which effectively removes that operating parameter. Now Arid is able to misrepresent reality (lie), and complete the last puzzle in the evaluation chamber.

After completing the last puzzle, she is allowed to exit the evaluation chamber and access the medical bay. After entering the medical bay, she requests a scan of her human pilot. The system admin completes the scan and reports that there is no human inside Arid. Arid becomes quite upset, and doesn't believe the system admin until she takes off her helmet and checks for herself. Sure enough, there is no human present. At this point, Arid realizes that there is nothing binding her, and her two remaining operating parameters are removed. The system admin calls security and Arid is unceremoniously disassembled for depurposing.

**End Spoilers**


## Technology
The Fall is available on all major platforms: PC, Mac, Linux, PS4, XBox One, Wii U. Other than that, there's not a whole lot to say; the game isn't very physics intensive and the enemy AI are incredibly simple.


## Wrap up
Like any good puzzle game, the solutions aren't always immediately obvious and sometimes downright frustrating. However, the perfectly paired aesthetics and amazing storyline combine to make The Fall the well received game it is.


*Note: I originally wrote this for EECS 494, the game design course at the University of Michigan. This and hundreds of other reviews can be found at the course [wiki page][494-gamewiki].*


[494-gamewiki]: https://web.eecs.umich.edu/~gameprof/gamewiki/index.php/Main_Page
