---
title: "What's in a game: replay value"
date: 2015-02-09 16:00:00
tags:
- games
- game_design
- writing_201
---

*This is the second in a series of posts on important aspects of game design. In each, I answer the question in the general case, then discuss some specific examples from games that I’ve played.*


Let's talk about replay value in video games. For anyone unfamiliar with the concept, replay value is the value that is added to a game when it is played after its first completion. This is, I think, one of the most important aspects of game design. If your game has good replay value, then your players will want to play it multiple times, it will be on their minds longer, and they might even be more likely to recommend the game to their friends.

<!--more-->

Okay, so now we have an idea of what replay value is all about, but how does one create a game with great replay value? Well, lets run through a few common methods and an example of each in action.


### Storyline
(The importance of a good storyline could be the topic of an entire blog post, but for now I’ll just explain how it creates replay value.) If you’ve ever re-read a book or re-watched a movie or TV show, then you already understand. When a game has an interesting storyline, it’s fun to play it multiple times, just for the sake of the story; you will notice details you missed the first time and fall deeper in love with the characters. This is common for all storytelling media. However, what sets games apart from books, tv, and the ilk, is that the storyline of a game can change based on the player’s actions. A great example of this is in a game called [Dishonored][dishonored-wikipedia]. In Dishonored, you are Corvo Attano, royal protector turned assassin after you are accused of murdering your charge, the empress. Throughout the game, you are given multiple missions, each of which can be achieved with varying levels of stealth and violence. Your actions as Corvo affect the level of “chaos” in the game, which in turn controls the atmosphere, certain gameplay elements, and, ultimately, the ending of the game. The less violent you are, the happier the ending is, and vice-versa. Each variation of the storyline adds depth to the character development, provides greater insight into the world of the game. Combined, they make the game more interesting with each playthrough.

{% include figure.html description="Dishonored promotional artwork." figure_url="/img/dishonored_game.jpg" source="http://cdn4.dualshockers.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/dishonored.jpg" link_url="http://youtu.be/E1HlYTukh9A" %}

### Gameplay
(Again, this could be an entire blog post.) Gameplay can add replay value in a couple different ways. First, and probably most common, is the concept of difficulty. I touched on this generally in a [previous post]({% post_url 2015-01-30-3 %}), but lets talk about it in terms of replay value. In general, games will get more difficult as they progress; this usually happens automatically as the game progresses, and sometimes the user can manually change the difficulty to be easy, medium, hard, etc. The idea is that as the player gets better at the game, he will be able to play at a progressively higher difficulty level. Often this occurs over the course of multiple playthroughs until the player achieves mastery over the game, completing it at the highest difficulty.


Another way gameplay adds replay value is when it varies from playthrough to playthrough. This is exhibited in Dishonored. I mentioned that the storyline of Dishonored can change between playthroughs, and the thing that changes the storyline is the gameplay: how stealthy or openly chaotic you choose to be. In this way, the game can feel drastically different between playthroughs. When you are more stealthy, you do a lot of sneaking around, you might not kill as many people, and you will explore your environment looking for the most secretive route. When you are openly violent, you’ll probably walk straight into combat instead exploring, you’ll cause more explosions, and you’ll have to deal with more rats and zombie-like citizens (both of which will try to eat and/or kill you if you’re not careful) as the city becomes overrun by a plague. These wildly differing styles of gameplay almost make each playthrough feel like a completely different game.


### Multiple Playable Characters
You can also add replay value by creating multiple characters for the player to play as. This is something that the [Borderlands][borderlands-wikipedia] series does quite well. In each game, you can choose to play as one of four different characters (more are available as DLC). Each character has a different personality, backstory, and a “special skill” that you can activate at short bursts. The character you choose won’t affect the storyline, but it can affect your gameplay in that you’ll probably prefer a different style of combat for each skill. This, combined with the insane number of guns, allows you to develop mastery of a different style of combat in each playthrough.

{% include figure.html description="All of the playable characters in Borderlands 2" figure_url="/img/borderlands_2_game.jpg" source="http://static.gamespot.com/uploads/original/mig/5/2/8/3/2045283-638784_20130702_002.jpg" link_url="http://youtu.be/nicvyhrmTDs" %}


If you would like to learn more, I’ve realized that there is a [wikipedia page][replay-value-wikipedia] for this exact topic.


[dishonored-wikipedia]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dishonored
[dishonored-image]: http://vignette4.wikia.nocookie.net/dishonoredvideogame/images/c/cd/Dishonored_%28Corvo%29.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20120811222012
[dishonored-video]: http://youtu.be/E1HlYTukh9A

[borderlands-wikipedia]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borderlands
[borderlands-2-image]: http://static.gamespot.com/uploads/original/mig/5/2/8/3/2045283-638784_20130702_002.jpg
[borderlands-2-video]: http://youtu.be/nicvyhrmTDs
  
[replay-value-wikipedia]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Replay_value
