---
title: "Switching to GitLab Pages"
date: 2016-12-27
tags:
- programming
- meta
---

I just finished transitioning from [GitHub Pages][github_pages_link] to [GitLab Pages][gitlab_pages_link]. This post discusses the reasoning behind the transition, the steps I took, and the resolutions for problems I encountered.

<!--more-->

## Reasoning
There wasn't any single reason to switch. My site is extremely simple and I have been happy with GitHub pages. Regardless, there were a few reasons why I wanted to switch:

1. GitLab Pages supports TLS for custom domains.
2. I wanted to support one of GitHub's competitors. I don't have anything against GitHub, I just think a little competition is healthy for both companies.
3. GitLab just released Pages a few days ago and I wanted to try it out.

## Steps
Transitioning to GitLab Pages was pretty straightforward. I essentially just followed the [setup guide][gitlab_pages_setup_guide] and then the [TLS setup tutorial][gitlab_pages_tls_setup]. I just made a couple tweaks to each:

### GitLab Pages setup tweaks
In addition to the vanilla Jekyll setup, I followed the example they provide [here][gitlab_pages_jekyll_bundle_setup]. This is an example of using [Bundler][bundler_link] to build a Jekyll site.

### GitLab Pages TLS setup tweaks
For the Let's Encrypt verification step, I left off the ```.html``` in the permalink and the file name. So I ended up with a file named as ```letsencrypt-setup``` that looked like this:

```
---
layout: null
permalink: /.well-known/acme-challenge/LongUrlString
---

LongTokenString
```

Other than these small changes, the guides worked perfectly.

## Problem resolutions
I ran into a couple minor problems in the transition.

### JEKYLL_ENV environment variable
I use the ```JEKYLL_ENV``` environment variable to do different things depending on if the site is being built locally or in production. For example, using remote scripts in production and local scripts for development. GitHub Pages provides the ```JEKYLL_ENV``` environment variable, while GitLab Pages does not. Therefore, now need to set the ```JEKYLL_ENV``` manually in my ```.gitlab-ci.yml```. Here's the relevant snippet:

```yaml
pages:
  variables:
    JEKYLL_ENV: production
```

### Default permalink
The next problem is that GitLab Pages treats permalinks slightly differently. Specifically, GitLab Pages doesn't seem to play well with permalinks that don't end with either a trailing slash or a file extension (e.g. ```.html```). Therefore, the permalink I used in my ```_config.yml``` no longer worked:

```yaml
permalink: /blog/:title
```

The fix is simple but subtle:

```yaml
permalink: /blog/:title/
```

Tada!

### Insecure content
The final problem is that some of the images I used in my posts were located at http:// links. This mixing of http:// into TLS pages is undesirable and a potential security risk. The fix, fortunately, is simple:

1. Download all images and host locally (on GitLab's servers).
2. Provide a source to the original image in the footnote of the image.

Hosting locally allows the images to be served through the same TLS connection as the rest of the site. Also, image links will no longer be broken if the original owner takes down the image.

## To Do
~~HTTPS redirection is still a problem. I implemented the JavaScript hack in the [tls setup][gitlab_pages_tls_setup], but this still won't work if the user has JavaScript disabled. I wish there was a way to redirect to HTTPS without JavaScript. Please let me know if figure out a way to do it.~~

Update (May 2018): GitLab now supports [HTTPS redirection for custom domains][https_redirect]!

## Conclusion
Overall the transition was pretty painless. Was the switch necessary? No. But it was fun and didn't take too long.

Also, thanks to [Let's Encrypt][lets_encrypt_link] for the free TLS certificate! Because of them, I can now serve content over a secure connection!

[github_pages_link]: https://pages.github.com/
[gitlab_pages_link]: https://pages.gitlab.io/
[gitlab_pages_setup_guide]: https://about.gitlab.com/2016/04/07/gitlab-pages-setup/
[gitlab_pages_tls_setup]: https://about.gitlab.com/2016/04/11/tutorial-securing-your-gitlab-pages-with-tls-and-letsencrypt/
[gitlab_pages_jekyll_bundle_setup]: https://gitlab.com/jekyll-themes/default-bundler
[bundler_link]: https://bundler.io/
[lets_encrypt_link]: https://letsencrypt.org/
[https_redirect]: https://about.gitlab.com/2018/04/22/gitlab-10-7-released/#gitlab-pages-automatic-https-redirect
