---
title: "Grouped Timers for Pebble"
date: 2017-05-16
tags:
- programming
- pebble
---

I created an app for [Pebble][pebble-link] watches! It's a timer app that
allows you to group timers into lists. Timer groups can be set to automatically
progress through the list, starting each timer after the previous one finishes.
Multiple timers can run at the same time, even if they are in the same group.
The app is published [here][app-link]. Also, the code is open sourced and can
be found [here][code-link].

<!--more-->

{% include figure.html description="Main view, group view, and countdown view"
figure_url="/img/pebble_screenshot_0.png"
figure_url2="/img/pebble_screenshot_1.png"
figure_url3="/img/pebble_screenshot_2.png" %}

## Why create yet another timer app for Pebble?
At work I have a sit-stand desk, so I alternate sitting and standing for 45 and
15 minutes, respectively. Before I had this app, I would use the official timer
app to remind myself when I should switch between standing and sitting; however,
I would often forget to start the next timer after I switched. So I needed an
app that would allow me to group timers together into lists and start the next
timer automatically so I wouldn't forget. Unfortunately, no such app existed, so
I decided to create it myself!

## MVC framework
One challenge I ran into in the first version of the app was how to synchronize
the state of the timers throughout the app. This is because I didn't have a
centralized way to update the timers and instead just had the countdown view
update the timers. This doesn't scale and was rather buggy and error prone.
To resolve this problem, I created a lightweight MVC framework adapted from one
I created for a course in college.

The framework I created in college was in C++, so the translation to C for the
Pebble SDK was pretty straightforward. However, the framework uses a
polymorphic view hierarchy so that the model doesn't need to know about the
different types of views. This complicates the translation to C because
polymorphism isn't really supported in C. However, because I don't actually
need true polymorphism, I was able to get around this problem by creating a
[set of callbacks][view-interface] that individual views can implement and provide
to the base view implementation. This callback idiom is pretty common
[throughout the Pebble SDK][menu-layer-callbacks] (and probably in other C code,
I haven't looked into it) and does a really good job of providing an abstract
view class to the model.

The main benefit of using an MVC framework is that I can use the model as a
centralized place to update everything. I can just have a single [app timer][app-timer]
that runs every second and updates all the timers. Then the timers just tell
the model when to update the views and the model just calls the appropriate
interface method on all the views that have been attached to the model.

## Dynamic font sizes
Another interesting problem I ran into was sizing timer text dynamically
depending on the length of the timer text. This is most important in the
[countdown view][countdown-view], but it's also used in the [edit view][edit-view].
The idea is that the largest font is too big for a timer like 10:30:00, but the
smallest text is smaller than necessary for a timer like :30. Also,
[different Pebble models have different screen sizes][screen-sizes], so it would
be pretty painful to hard-code all the optimal font sizes for each screen size and
timer text lengths.

Luckily, the Pebble API has a [method][graphics-layout] to calculate how much
space is required to display text with a given font size. This can be used to compare the
space required to display different font sizes and find the optimal font size.
In the case of this app, the optimal font size is the max of the
[preferred font size][preferred-font-size] and the largest font size that
will fit in the available bounds of the screen.

There is one issue with this approach, however. In the font I'm using to display
timers, the [Leco font][leco-font], the '1' character has a slightly
different width than all the other number characters. This means that even if two
strings are the same length, e.g. '11:11' and '23:45', the first string will
take up slightly less space than the second, so the font size calculation can
return different font sizes for each string. The solution to this problem is
pretty simple, though. You just use the size calculation mentioned above to
calculate the difference in width between the '1' character and all the other
number characters, then add that amount for every '1' character in the string
when calculating the font size, so something like the following pseudo code:

```
timer_string = "11:11"
actual_width = (width('2') - width('1')) * (count_ones(timer_string))
```

And voila! The font sizes adjust automatically.

{% include figure.html description="Different font sizes in the countdown view"
figure_url="/img/pebble_screenshot_small_text.png"
figure_url2="/img/pebble_screenshot_large_text.png" %}

## Gitlab pipelines
Another thing that was really fun about this project was experimenting with
Gitlab's pipeline system. With this system I am able to generate debug builds
for every commit, and release builds for commits merged to the master branch.
This is great for verifying that a change doesn't break the build before merging
it into master. I can also save the `.pbw` file as an artifact of a pipeline
build so I can have a place to host the `.pbw` file for installation in case
the Pebble app store ever goes away. For example, the latest debug build on
the master branch can be found [here][latest-debug-build]. I could also use
the pipeline to verify that a change doesn't break any tests before merging into
master, but I haven't gotten around to writing tests yet.

## To do
The app is pretty much complete in my opinion. However, the one thing that I
should have done that I never got around to is writing tests. My excuse is that
it's difficult to write unit tests for an embedded platform such as Pebble, but
just because it's difficult doesn't mean it shouldn't be done. If I had more time,
I would do a better job of investigating writing tests for the app. Maybe I'll
come back to it in the future, or maybe someone will feel compelled to contribute
to the app with tests. In any case, I've mostly completed development, so it's
questionable how much value would actually be gained from writing tests at this
point.

## Conclusion
I had a lot of fun creating this app. The Pebble API was a joy to work with and
it was nice to get a chance to use C again. Please feel free to download the
app from the [app store][app-link] or from the [latest pipeline build][latest-debug-build].
If you have any questions or feedback about the app or want to talk about C or
Pebble development, let me know!


[pebble-link]: https://www.pebble.com/
[app-link]: https://apps.getpebble.com/en_US/application/58f985730dfc329fda001649
[code-link]: https://gitlab.com/spencewenski/pebble_grouped_timers
[view-interface]: https://spencewenski.gitlab.io/pebble_grouped_timers/struct_view__interface.html
[menu-layer-callbacks]: https://developer.pebble.com/docs/c/User_Interface/Layers/MenuLayer/#MenuLayerCallbacks
[app-timer]: https://developer.pebble.com/docs/c/Foundation/Timer/
[edit-view]: https://spencewenski.gitlab.io/pebble_grouped_timers/group___edit__view.html
[countdown-view]: https://spencewenski.gitlab.io/pebble_grouped_timers/group___countdown__view.html
[screens-sizes]: https://developer.pebble.com/guides/best-practices/building-for-every-pebble/#screen-sizes
[graphics-layout]: https://developer.pebble.com/docs/c/Graphics/Drawing_Text/#graphics_text_layout_get_content_size
[preferred-font-size]: https://spencewenski.gitlab.io/pebble_grouped_timers/group__draw__utility.html#gaff48d5e19d87ce0ec559d9ecfc8e2505
[leco-font]: https://developer.pebble.com/guides/app-resources/system-fonts/#leco
[latest-debug-build]: https://gitlab.com/spencewenski/pebble_grouped_timers/builds/artifacts/master/browse/?job=debug_deploy
